["Toreador song - Aria of the hot spring
manners" playing in Italian]
["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
A.D. 131 NEAR ROME
[horse brays]
[grunts] Master Lucius,
what in blazes are you doing over there?
Just one moment, I'm nearly finished now.
Any further dawdling
and you shall answer to the emperor.
Now get moving at once!
[Lucius]
Well, parts of me are certainly moving.
[sighs]
[upbeat mid-tempo music]
[Lucius] I am not a child.
I must overcome these nerves
and stop them from ravaging my bowels.
I'm surely overthinking
that frightful comment Marcus made.
What? Emperor Hadrian has summoned you
to his villa?
-Yes.
-[sighs]
I cannot even begin to fathom
why he would summon
a simple thermae architect like myself.
What could he possibly want?
Probably to kill you.
You know, I bet he's jealous
you're a better architect than he is.
That's fame for you.
[sighs]
[laughs] I'm kidding. Relax, man!
[Lucius]
A royal summons is no laughing matter,
so these bubble guts of mine
are only natural, right?
-[stomach gurgles]
-[Lucius] Curse you, Marcus!
I hope your body betrays you
in the fury of Brunus!
[sneezes loudly]
Aw, man. Do I have a cold?
Right this way, Master Lucius.
[Lucius] But…
This is no mere villa! It's enormous.
Why, it's practically its own city.
It is said that Emperor Hadrian designed
every inch of this architecture himself
and that the bathhouse here
is his pride and joy.
-[stomach gurgles]
-[groans softly]
There goes my stomach again…
Centurion Caelius Clemens
reporting for duty.
I've returned from Rome with
the thermae architect, Lucius Modestus.
You certainly did take your time.
Hurry up and come in, his majesty awaits.
Sir, follow them inside.
[gulps, groans]
[groaning softly]
[gasps]
-[gentle relaxing music]
-[birds chirping]
[Lucius] This atrium is astounding.
It's even surrounded by a moat.
Such a design is unlike anything
I've ever seen in Roman architecture.
From this point forward,
his majesty asks that you proceed alone.
Alone? Why would…
Emperor Hadrian built this villa
to serve as a sanctuary of solitude.
Under normal circumstances,
anyone other than his majesty
crossing this bridge
would be grounds for severe punishment.
But it seems you are an exception.
The emperor insists that there is
something he must show only to you.
That's… cryptic.
It is his majesty's right
to be as vague as he likes.
Now go to him at once!
[sighs]
[gentle music]
[grunts]
[Lucius] I suppose I have no choice.
Whatever the emperor wants to show me
must be quite important
if he's allowing me
to enter his private sanctum.
What sort of room is this?
The design was certainly a choice.
[Hadrian] You look as though you do not
approve of the way I designed the space.
[gasps]
You're Emperor Hadrian.
Yes, and I think it you're Lucius,
the thermae designer.
[gasps] Yes, sire.
My name is Lucius Modestus
and I am your humble servant.
There is no need to be so formal, Lucius.
Thank you.
[Lucius]
That's easy enough for him to say.
Your work is famous, you know.
When I first heard about the marvelous
innovative baths you had created,
I knew as a fellow designer
who values novelty and originality
that you were the one for the task.
Sire?
Look around the room and tell me, Lucius,
what sort of bathhouse would you construct
in a narrow space like this one?
You… you want me to build a bath here?
Yes, and I'm certain it will be splendid.
After all, I heard you once managed
to build a bath in a courtyard.
[Lucius] Aye, but…
compared to a project this grand,
that was but a trifle.
You really need not feign humility.
One man's trifle is another's triumph.
Remember, never sell yourself short
on what you're able to accomplish.
-[gentle music]
-Let me ask you something.
Did you know that the senate
does not view me very favorably, Lucius?
It is because I choose to spend my days
within the provinces
instead of conquering neighboring lands.
Apparently, the senate resents me
for that preference.
And yet, I still value preserving peace
within Rome
more than expanding its borders.
I built this island retreat so that
I'd be able to work toward that end
and test all my plans in quiet solitude.
But when one is cooped up with one's work,
the heart yearns
for the comforts of a bath
and yet when I go to to the local thermae,
it is far too noisy
for me to gather my thoughts.
That is why…
I need your help, Lucius.
I need you to help me build
my own private bath.
But your majesty,
Apollodorus himself is already
under your employ as an architect.
Why would you need me?
Ah, I'm afraid Apollodorus was let go.
What?
He's quite skilled
but his ideas are far too old-fashioned.
I reassigned him
to oversee the construction
of military infrastructure on the border.
[Lucius]
Even the legendary architect Apollodorus
failed to satisfy his majesty's appetite
for novelty!
I need someone like you, Lucius,
someone young,
bold and full of attractive new ideas.
My faith in you is so strong,
I travelled back here
from Egypt specifically
to speak with you and make this proposal.
I will be taking my leave for Jerusalem
in one month's time.
Apparently, there some there
who plot to try
and shatter the peace I desire.
I must clear my mind before I depart
so that I may focus entirely
on how to deal with them when I arrive.
As a Roman bound to protect the empire,
will you assist me
in this solemn endeavor, Lucius?
[triumphant music]
Yes, your majesty, I promise you I will.
[grunts]
[Lucius] This opportunity is a gift
from Emperor Hadrian.
I will tarnish my very pride as a Roman
if I let it go to waste!
[Lucius] Speaking of waste,
what on earth have I gotten myself into?
I mean, look at this thing.
Even the tiling in this latrine
is a decadent work of art.
How can I ever hope to impress a man
so original,
he creates where he defecates?
[sighs]
[birds chirping]
[Lucius] To think that his majesty
would be such a solitary person
living in a grand palace such as this.
The man goes so far
as to shut himself in a small room
and even surrounded it with a moat.
I cannot help but feel sorry
for the poor soul.
[grunts] Wait!
If there's a moat here,
surely that must mean it is drawing water
from some sort of waterway.
And if there's a water source,
then the foremost obstacle in bath design
can be easily overcome.
I must find where the water
enters and exits.
I could've sworn I could see the bottom
but my feet aren't touching anything.
[groans]
SHINJUKU 2009
SHOWROOM
What?
So it'll just be me at reception alone?
Some urgent business has come up,
so I have to go.
But sir, I don't even speak
this client's language.
Don't worry, the client is Italian,
but maybe they picked up Japanese
from their trips here.
You both work in plumbing, right?
Just keep the conversation
at a low flow. [laughs]
Speaking of which,
his appointment was at three
and he's still not here,
so maybe you're off the hook.
But if he does show up,
just walk him around the place.
-Wait, sir, I…
-Good luck, I believe in you, bye bye!
[groans softly]
[sighs]
[gasping softly]
[ticking]
[woman] What should I do?
The client is Italian,
so maybe he's just fashionably late.
But he may not get here for hours
and I have work to do.
I love this one…
[woman] I suppose if there's an emergency,
Yoshizawa can help out too.
[grunts] You know what?
I don't need her help.
You've got this, Mami Yamaguchi!
You've worked so hard to get here
and you can handle any foreign clients
that pop up…
-[lighthearted music]
-[Lucius gasping]
NEW EXCEL SERIES
A…
[woman] A foreigner.
[Lucius] What is this place?
The Italian client?
[Lucius] A flat-faced woman.
[nervously] Welcome. We've been
looking forward to your arrival, sir.
[sighs]
I see. It appears I'm back in that world.
If only I could choose when I come back.
[woman] The director…
[Lucius] This room is certainly unusual.
Have I emerged
inside someone's home this time?
[woman] …he returns.
This slave will certainly face
unfortunate consequences
if I am discovered here with her.
Oh dear!
Sir, wait!
Your clothes, cover that thing up!
[Lucius] What on earth
is this poor woman so flustered for?
[gasps] No. Please just let me think.
BATHROBE
[woman] That's it!
[woman] As you can see, the units
on the floor here are quite spacious
with plenty of room for modifications.
We even offer seats
for hip bath conversions.
These newer tubs
are our most popular selections.
[Lucius] So many strange
and advanced looking mechanisms.
-Could this be a wealthy person's villa?
-[woman] We also have
tubs that are more streamlined
and easy to use. But a customer who's…
[Lucius]
I must investigate this luxurious place.
-[gentle percussive music]
-Hmm?
Mami.
You okay over here?
I can call security if you need me to.
I was worried he might be here
to cause trouble at first myself,
but I'm not sure now. Just watch.
He's so focused on the tubs,
I don't think
he even knows we're here anymore.
You see? He has to be
some kind of plumbing expert, right?
Uh, if you say so.
Italy is in a recession,
maybe he's focusing like this
because his business is on the line?
Yeah, I guess that makes sense.
I'll let you take care of it then.
-But if you need me, just holler.
-Sure, thank you.
My apologies for the wait, sir.
How goes your inspection?
Uh, not good?
[Lucius] For 900 years,
Rome has been the center of world culture.
I thought we had assimilated
all the world's knowledge in our conquest
from Etruria to Carthage to Greece.
But how does one explain
this nation's technological advances
which are so far beyond
anything Rome has ever conceived of?
As a patriot,
the thought wounds me to my core
but it seems as if this country
has thoroughly conquered Rome
without ever meeting us in battle!
Is everything alright?
[Lucius]
Why does this flat-faced woman behave
as if she is ignorant
of her land's superiority?
Does she mock me?
[woman] Why is he staring at me?
-One thing is certainly clear.
-Do you need something?
These people surely don't have
the military might
to stand against Rome
on the field of battle.
But learning that our civilization
falls short of theirs
is a crushing blow in and of itself!
[pensive music]
For what purpose
the gods have sent me to this land
I do not know.
But it is my divine duty
to remain firm in my resolve
and to never run in fear
from the task at hand.
For the sake of Rome,
I must help the emperor build baths
even greater than the ones I find here
and bring a new age of progress
and prosperity
to the empire I love so dearly!
[grunts softly]
Oh, have these TVs made it to Italy yet,
sir?
This particular model
has been especially popular lately.
[Lucius] Neptune's trident!
[woman]
Wait, how do I turn the sound on again?
[Lucius] What mysticism is this?
They've managed to install an aquarium
inside the wall.
Um, do you like it?
You're welcome to step inside
and lay down for a while if you'd like to.
[giggles]
What do you think? It's very convenient.
Now you can sit and watch TV
while you take a bath. Isn't that great?
[Lucius]
This impertinent slave dares to smile
and patronize me at a time like this?
Filling a wall with water does not
an empress make, madame.
-[lighthearted piano music]
-[sighs]
But still,
the idea of putting an aquarium
in the wall of one's bathhouse
along with this tiny
yet somehow incredibly comfortable bath
is a glorious one.
Such unbridled ingenuity
is simply unthinkable for one such as me
who has made it this far by copying
the innovations of my betters
like a petty thief!
[scoffs]
When Emperor Hadrian finds out the truth
that I am an abject failure,
he will surely have my head.
-[stomach gurgles]
-[groans]
What's the matter, sir?
[in Roman] Where's the restroom?
-What?
-[in Roman] The restroom!
Do you need to use the restroom?
Well, here we are at the men's room.
[lighthearted piano music continues]
They even have private toilet rooms here.
I'm not sure how I feel about sacrificing
the sparkling conversation one has
when doing one's business but…
Is this the toilet?
What is this stone covering
that occludes the hole?
Perhaps it is a fine aesthetic feature
but it is a dire hindrance in times like
these when nature calls so desperately.
[groans]
These mad geniuses hid a slave
inside the walls to open the lid?
-[stomach gurgles]
-[groans]
My research of this matter can wait,
time is of the essence!
[down-tempo music]
Just how many slaves
did these people purchase
to operate a single toilet?
Having someone make music
while I make waste
certainly seems excessive
but it is quite soothing.
[grunting softly]
Huh?
An illustration of something
touching a person's buttocks?
SOFT, MOVE START/STOP
[shouts]
-[loud rattling]
-[gasps]
[Lucius in Roman]
What are you doing, you insolent fool!
-[flushing]
-[gasping]
[Lucius] A fountain?
So, the water that blasted my buttocks
was some sort of washing device.
Well,
I suppose it's certainly more hygienic
than the methods we're used to in Rome.
I never thought about it
but we do reuse the same sponges
everyone else has scrubbed down with.
Fine.
I shall try it one more time.
[gulps]
-[uplifting piano music]
-[sighing]
It's marvelous.
In all my years on this earth,
I've never felt so…
[sighing] Free… Free… Free…
[sobbing happily]
[uplifting piano music ends]
-I hope he's alright.
-[man] Yamaguchi!
-[scoffing]
-Oh! Welcome back, sir.
You want to tell me
what you're doing creeping around
by the men's room
when there's work to be done?
Huh?
Our client just arrived
and you weren't there!
Hi.
That's the client?
Then who's the Italian man in there?
What did you say?
There's no one in here, damn it!
[gasps]
[birds chirping]
[Hadrian] I feel quite fortunate
that I arrived in time
to pull you out of the moat
when you were drowning that day.
If I hadn't,
I never would've gotten the chance
to gaze upon these beautiful jellyfish
while I bathe.
I am mortified to have troubled you,
your highness.
Don't be. I'm simply glad
you lived to tell the tale.
And now, thanks to your bath,
I can leave for Jerusalem
with my mind and heart refreshed.
You've given me a wondrous gift.
I thank you, Sir Lucius.
I am not worthy of your kindness, sire.
I am deeply impressed.
That toilet you constructed for me
with its special washing device
is indeed a technical marvel.
You are a truly original talent, Lucius,
not some charlatan who just steals
the great works of other cultures.
Knowing that there are Roman citizens
like you
gives me hope
for the future of the empire.
To think that jellyfish
could sooth my heart so completely,
I can't wait to hear
how the acclaimed designers
of Greece will try to imitate this.
[Hadrian laughs]
[Lucius] Lying to his majesty this way
is a heavy weight upon my heart
but it is for the sake of Rome's future.
If the ideas I have adopted
lead my homeland to prosperity,
then surely the ends justify
these rather questionable means, right?
-I have decided, Lucius.
-What?
I want you to travel as my companion
on my journey to Jerusalem.
Uh…
It would fill my heart with joy
to have you there by my side.
I ask you to man my plumbing
and be with me as my companion.
So…
You, uh…
You come, do it for Rome's sake.
-I beg of you.
-Oh…
[triumphant orchestral music]
[Lucius grunting]
[groaning softly] Oh my…
Venus, help me…
[gentle laidback music]
[male narrator]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey to rediscover
Japan's bathing culture.
I'm in the northwestern part
of Gunma Prefecture.
It's a place called Shima Onsen.
SHIMA ONSEN
[Mari] It feels like time has stopped
in this charming
and traditional hot spring town.
Let's see what they have here.
This is a very old hot spring town.
The townscape looks as if
it hasn't changed for decades,
and maybe even longer than that.
This really feels like
the traditional Japanese hot spring town
hidden in the mountains.
-Nice to meet you.
-Nice to meet you. Welcome.
-Thank you.
I was walking around Shima Onsen,
and saw this sign.
What is this place?
This is a place where you can drink
the hot spring.
It's called "insen," and it's a specialty
here at Shima Onsen.
In addition to this place,
there are other insen locations
inside inns and such.
So not only can you
soak in the hot spring,
you can also enjoy
the benefits of the Shima hot spring
by drinking it?
Yes, that's right. There are benefits
to drinking the hot spring.
It helps with gastrointestinal issues
and constipation.
-Oh really?
-Yes.
-That's wonderful.
-Well, I'd like to refresh my stomach.
-I see.
-To put things in order.
-Yes.
[gentle uplifting music]
SHIO NO YU INSEN-JO
I'm going to try the hot spring now.
I brought this cup.
This is specially made for insen.
I'll drink through here.
It's like a straw.
[gasps] It's good.
It's surprisingly good.
I can feel it nourishing my body.
It almost tastes like broth.
It's like soup.
But it's not strongly flavored like soup.
It's a great way to drink hot water.
Drinking this every day
will make you very healthy.
This is good for your body.
It's good.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[male narrator] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
I wanted Lucius to drink the hot spring.
Hot springs not only
warm you from the outside,
but they also
exert a lot of benefits from the inside.
You can experience that at Shima Onsen.
[male narrator]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue
as she searches for more hot springs.
[opera music ends]
[quirky piano music]